Add draft page for conceptual model (#112)
mapping-commons/rda-fair-mappings: src/docs/model.md

??? note "View original diagram"

    ![Conceptual Model](img/conceptual_model.png)

## Core Concepts

### Mapping Specification

A **mapping specification** is a documented description of correspondences between elements in different information systems, schemas, or vocabularies. It serves as the central concept in our model.

A mapping specification:

- Is both a **dataset** (can be published, versioned, and cited) and an **entity** (can be tracked through provenance)
- Contains one or more **mapping relationships** as its parts
- Can be serialized in various formats (e.g., SSSOM, LinkML-Map, XSLT, Python scripts)
- Should include metadata for findability and reusability (see [Recommendations](recommendation.md))

### Mapping Relationship

A **mapping relationship** is a correspondence within a mapping specification that relates one or more source elements to one or more target elements. Mapping relationships can range from simple equivalence assertions to complex transformation rules.

A mapping relationship may specify:

> - One or more **subjects** (source elements being mapped)

Author: ```suggestion
- One or more **source elements**
```

- Combining multiple source fields into one target field
- Splitting one source field into multiple target fields
- Applying functions or lookups during transformation

#### Instance-Level Mapping

An **instance-level mapping** describes how a single dataset instance is transformed into a different form. Unlike schema mappings, instance-level mappings make no assumptions about schema generality—the transformation code is specific to that particular source instance and is not expected to work for arbitrary instances that might conform to the same schema.

Characteristics of instance-level mappings:

- Tailored to a specific source dataset instance
- May include hard-coded values, instance-specific logic, or bespoke transformations
- Not designed to be reusable across different datasets of the same type
- Often created for one-off data migration or integration tasks

Examples include:

- A custom script to transform a specific legacy database export into a new format
- A one-time transformation of a particular CSV file into RDF
- An ad-hoc conversion of a single institution's data dump

#### Mapping Set

> A **mapping set** is a type of mapping specification that groups related mapping relationships together, typically for a specific purpose or representing mappings between two particular sources. A mapping set is often the unit of publication and sharing.

Author: ```suggestion
A **mapping set** is a type of mapping specification that groups predicate-based mapping relationships together, typically in the form of subject, (mapping) predicate, object triples along with additional metadata. A mapping set is often the unit of publication and sharing.
```
